<!-- THIS FILE IS AUTOMATICALLY GENERATED BY DOCBUILDER, DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY! -->

# AdoptedPartition

Settings to adopt a pre-existing partition.

| Characteristic | Value |
| -------------- | ----- |
| Type | `object` |

## Properties

### `id` **<span style="color:orange;">(required)</span>**

A unique identifier for the partition.

This is a user defined string that allows to link the partition to the mount points and also to results in the Host Status. The identifier needs to be unique across all types of devices, not just partitions.

| Characteristic | Value |
| -------------- | ----- |
| Type | `string` |
| Format | `Block Device ID` |

### `size` **<span style="color:orange;">(required)</span>**

Optionally resize the partition.

Note: Only expanding is supported for adoption. Trying to shrink a partition will result in an error.

Format: String `<number>[<unit>]`

Accepted values:

- `grow`: Use all available space. It is recommended to ONLY use this for the last partition on the disk.

- A number with optional unit suffixes: K, M, G, T (to the base of 1024), bytes by default when no unit is specified. For new partitions, it will attempt to create a partition of this size. If a partition is being adopted, size MUST NOT be less than the size of the partition being adopted. Only expanding is supported for adoption.

Examples:

- `1G`

- `200M`

- `grow`

| Characteristic | Value |
| -------------- | ----- |
| Type | `string` |

### `continue_if_no_match` (optional)

Set to true to continue if a match could not be made, otherwise produce an error and stop installation if no match was found.

| Characteristic | Value |
| -------------- | ----- |
| Type | `boolean` |

### `name` (optional)

Match a specific partition by its name.

Look for a partition with the given name and adopt it.

| Characteristic | Value |
| -------------- | ----- |
| Type | `string` |

### `next_of_type` (optional)

Match the first partition with the given type.

**Use as a last resort.**

| Characteristic | Value |
| -------------- | ----- |
| Type | `PartitionType` |
| Link | [PartitionType](./PartitionType.md) |

### `position` (optional)

Match a specific partition by its current position on the partition table.

Look for a partition at the given position in the partition table and adopt it. The position is 0-based.

| Characteristic | Value |
| -------------- | ----- |
| Type | `integer` |
| Format | `uint64` |

### `uuid` (optional)

Match a specific partition by its UUID.

Look for a partition with the given UUID and adopt it.

**This is the best option, use whenever possible.**

| Characteristic | Value |
| -------------- | ----- |
| Type | `string` |
| Format | `uuid` |

